[NVPTX] Add Intrinsics for discard.* (#128404)
llvm/llvm-project: llvm/docs/NVPTXUsage.rst

For more information, refer to the PTX ISA
`<https://docs.nvidia.com/cuda/parallel-thread-execution/#data-movement-and-conversion-instructions-prefetch-prefetchu>`_.

``llvm.nvvm.discard.*``'
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

.. code-block:: llvm

  declare void  @llvm.nvvm.discard.global.L2(ptr addrspace(1) %global_ptr, i64 %size)
  declare void  @llvm.nvvm.discard.L2(ptr %ptr, i64 %size)

Overview:
"""""""""

> The '``@llvm.nvvm.discard.*``'  invalidates the data at the address range [a .. a + (size - 1)] 

Reviewer: This is not accurate, the **effects** of `llvm.nvvm.discard` are equivalent to those of an `llvm.memset` that writes `undef` to memory: 

```llvm
llvm.nvvm discard ptr %p, i64 8 // writes `undef` to [p, p+8)
%a = load i64, ptr %p  // loads undef
%b = load i64, ptr %p // loads undef
%fa = freeze %a // freezes undef to stable bitpatter
%fb = freeze %b // freezes undef to stable bitpattern
assert %fa == %fb || %fa != %fb // %fa != %fb is a correct outcome
```

The `llvm.nvvm.discard` intrinsic writes undef with a **performance hint** to avoid write-backs in a particular cache level, but that's not really part of its effects.

For more information, refer to the PTX ISA
`<https://docs.nvidia.com/cuda/parallel-thread-execution/#data-movement-and-conversion-instructions-applypriority>`_.

``llvm.nvvm.discard.*``'
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

.. code-block:: llvm

  declare void  @llvm.nvvm.discard.global.L2(ptr addrspace(1) %global_ptr, i64 immarg)
  declare void  @llvm.nvvm.discard.L2(ptr %ptr, i64 immarg)

Overview:
"""""""""

> The '``@llvm.nvvm.discard.*``' semantically behaves like a weak write of an *unstable indeterminate value*: 
> reads of memory locations with *unstable indeterminate values* may return different 
> bit patterns each time until the memory is overwritten.
> This operation *hints* to the implementation that data in the specified cache ``.level`` 
> can be destructively discarded without writing it back to memory. The operand ``size`` is an 
> integer constant that specifies the length in bytes of the address range ``[a, a + size)`` to write 
> *unstable indeterminate values* into. The only supported value for the ``size`` operand is ``128``. 
> If no state space is specified then `generic-addressing` is used. If the specified address does 
> not fall within the address window of ``.global`` state space then the behavior is undefined.
> 
> LLVM does not define anywhere what an *unstable indeterminate values* is, and the closest concept 
> LLVM has breaks the example below:
> 
> .. code-block:: text
>   
>   discard.global.L2 [ptr], 128;
>   ld.weak.u32 r0, [ptr];
>   ld.weak.u32 r1, [ptr];
>   // The values in r0 and r1 may differ!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The *effects* of the ``@llvm.nvvm.discard.*`` intrinsics are those of a non-atomic non-volatile ``llvm.memset`` that writes ``undef`` to the destination address range ``[%ptr, %ptr + immarg)``. 
Subsequent reads from the address range may read ``undef`` until the memory is overwritten with a different value.
These operations *hint* the implementation that data in the L2 cache can be destructively discarded without writing it back to memory. 
The operand ``immarg`` is an integer constant that specifies the length in bytes of the address range ``[%ptr, %ptr + immarg)`` to write ``undef`` into. 
The only supported value for the ``immarg`` operand is ``128``. 
If generic addressing is used and the specified address does not fall within the address window of ``addrspace(1)`` the behavior is undefined.

.. code-block:: llvm
 
   call void @llvm.nvvm.discard.L2(ptr %p, i64 8) ;; writes `undef` to [p, p+8)
   %a = load i64, ptr %p  ;; loads undef
   %b = load i64, ptr %p ;; loads undef
   ;; comparing %a and %b compares undef values!
   %fa = freeze i64 %a ;; freezes undef to stable bitpatter
   %fb = freeze i64 %b ;; freezes undef to stable bitpattern
   ;; %fa may compare different to %fb!
   
For more information, refer to the  `CUDA C++ discard documentation <https://nvidia.github.io/cccl/libcudacxx/extended_api/memory_access_properties/discard_memory.html>`__ and the `PTX ISA discard documentation <https://docs.nvidia.com/cuda/parallel-thread-execution/#data-movement-and-conversion-instructions-discard>`__ .
```

Reviewer: @Artem-B is something like this clear enough?

For more information, refer to the PTX ISA
`<https://docs.nvidia.com/cuda/parallel-thread-execution/#data-movement-and-conversion-instructions-applypriority>`_.

``llvm.nvvm.discard.*``'
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Syntax:
"""""""

.. code-block:: llvm

  declare void  @llvm.nvvm.discard.global.L2(ptr addrspace(1) %global_ptr, i64 immarg)
  declare void  @llvm.nvvm.discard.L2(ptr %ptr, i64 immarg)

Overview:
"""""""""

The *effects* of the ``@llvm.nvvm.discard.L2*`` intrinsics are those of a non-atomic 
non-volatile ``llvm.memset`` that writes ``undef`` to the destination 
address range ``[%ptr, %ptr + immarg)``. 
Subsequent reads from the address range may read ``undef`` until the memory is overwritten 
with a different value.
These operations *hint* the implementation that data in the L2 cache can be destructively 
discarded without writing it back to memory. 
The operand ``immarg`` is an integer constant that specifies the length in bytes of the 

> address range ``[%ptr, %ptr + immarg)`` to write ``undef`` into. 

Reviewer 2: Are there any requirements on alignment of the pointer?

If the pointer is not required to be aligned on 128-byte boundary, does invalidation affect `[ptr, ptr+imm]` range only, or does it invalidate all cache lines overlapping specified range?

Reviewer 2: Per @gonzalobg comment the pointer must be aligned by 128. That's something we should mention in the doc.
Other than that, LGTM.

Overview:
"""""""""

> The '``@llvm.nvvm.discard.*``' semantically behaves like a weak write of an *unstable indeterminate value*: 

Reviewer: @abhilash1910 where does LLVM define what an *unstable indeterminate value* is? 
You'll need to adapt this to the LLVM abstract machine, since the semantics described here seem incompatible with it.
